[Blog Post] Use Late Interaction Models in Search (#4002)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2025-11-14-boost-search-relevancy-with-late-interaction-models.md

### Cross-encoder models (early/full interaction)

Cross-encoder models occupy the opposite end of the spectrum, achieving the highest accuracy through comprehensive query-document interaction.

In this architecture, the system concatenates the query with each candidate document (for example, "best hiking trails near Seattle" combined with document content) and processes this combined text through a transformer model. The model's attention mechanism enables every query token to attend to every document token during encoding, capturing nuanced relationships between query and document elements. The model then directly outputs a single relevance score for the query-document pair.

**Advantages**:
- **Highest accuracy**: Deep interaction captures sophisticated semantic relationships
- **Superior understanding**: Full attention mechanism provides comprehensive query-document analysis

**Limitations**:
- **Computational intensity**: Each query-document pair requires a complete forward pass through the model
- **No pre-computation**: Cannot leverage cached embeddings, limiting scalability
- **Latency concerns**: Processing overhead restricts real-time applications

> Cross-encoder models excel in second-phase reranking scenarios, where they reorder a small, pre-selected subset of results to optimize the most relevant matches. The size of the result set processed by cross-encoders typically depends on system requirements for cost, latency, and accuracy, but these models are commonly applied to first-page results only. OpenSearch provides native support for cross-encoder reranking through search pipelines. The following diagram demonstrates the cross-encoder architecture with its comprehensive query-document interaction mechanism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cross-encoder models excel in second-phase reranking scenarios, where they reorder a small, preselected subset of results to optimize the most relevant matches. The size of the result set processed by cross-encoders typically depends on system requirements for cost, latency, and accuracy, but these models are commonly applied to first-page results only. OpenSearch provides native support for cross-encoder reranking through search pipelines. The following diagram demonstrates the cross-encoder architecture with its comprehensive query-document interaction mechanism.
```

## How to use late interaction models in OpenSearch

The search industry commonly adopts a two-phase strategy to integrate late interaction models in a way that balances performance and accuracy. 

In the **first phase**, the system runs a fast approximate k-NN retrieval using single-vector embeddings from a bi-encoder model to select a small set of candidate documents from the full index. This step reduces the search space without the cost of processing multi-vector representations. 

In the **second phase**, a reranker applies late interaction scoring to those candidates, using token-level multi-vectors to compute more precise relevance scores. The final ranked results reflect these fine-grained similarity calculations, enabling nuanced semantic matching while preserving scalability.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---
layout: post

> title: "Boost search relevance with late interaction models"

Reviewer 2: Nice, love it!

![Late Interaction Models with ml-inference processors](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-11-14-boost-search-relevancy-with-late-interaction-models/auto-ml-inference-search-flow.png)

> In the following test running against the query "How can the orientation of texture be characterized?" on the same index `multimodal_docs`, on the left side, it's using the `colpali_search` search pipeline and on the right side, it's using the `titan_embedding_search` search pipeline. The expected result is row 7 page, which tells us the answers about the orientation of texture is characterized by a histogram of orientations. This row 7 page is ranking no.1 when using the colpali model on the left panel, but row 7 page is not in the results when using titan_embedding model on right panel. .

Reviewer 2: > This 'row 7 page' ranks no.1 when using the ColPali model (left panel), but is entirely missing in results when using the `titan_embedding` model (right panel).

You can replace the line with above ^^. It has minor word edits and ensures consistent styling for ColPali.

> In the following test running against the query "How can the orientation of texture be characterized?" on the same index `multimodal_docs`, on the left side, it's using the `colpali_search` search pipeline and on the right side, it's using the `titan_embedding_search` search pipeline. The expected result is row 7 page, which tells us the answers about the orientation of texture is characterized by a histogram of orientations. This row 7 page is ranking no.1 when using the colpali model on the left panel, but row 7 page is not in the results when using titan_embedding model on right panel. .

Author: replaced
